This video is brought to you by Blinkus the first 100 people to go to
blink.com/biographics are gonna get tried out for a week.
Also you'll get 25% off if you want the full membership,
which you probably will. Cause it's pretty great, more on them in a bit,
and let's get into it
All good things must come to an end.
And so did the Pacman a 200 year long period of time,
which represented the Roman empire at its most glorious and
most powerful.
It started with the formation of the empire under Augustas and ended with the
death of Marcus sores.
The last of so called five good Empress,
Mar aureus earns the so Bria,
the philosopher king because he personified the concept devised by Plato of
a ruler who was a lover of wisdom and who applied the ideas he learned in
his exercise of power. Margo Aures was stoic,
who believed that reason and virtue led to EU amonia or
blessedness. Despite this,
his reign as emperor was far from enlightened or peaceful during Israel,
Rome had to contend with two major wars,
a rebellion and the plagues that ravaged his em empire and in today's video.
Well, it's all about him.
Marcus aureus was born on April the 26th,
one hundred and twenty one eighty to Marcus Aus Veris III and Deia Luci.
His name of birth may have been Marcus Aus. Veris just like his father,
grandfather and great-grandfather,
but to avoid confusion will just call him Marcus aureus from the start.
His family were wealthy and relatively influe,
according to Cassius D one of our main sources for the reign of Marcus Aures,
his family was somehow related to Emper Hadrian Aures.
His father was a politician. Who'd held the office of prey tour,
but he died young when Marcus was just a child.
We're not sure on the exact date,
but it would've been around 124 ad while he was still in off
later. Marcus OS wrote that while he did not remember much of his father,
from what little memory he had of him, plus what other people have said.
He characterized his father by modesty and Manliness traits that
he sought to emulate. As far as his mother was concerned,
or res said that from her, he learns religious party.
Not only refraining from wrongdoing, this even from thoughts of it,
simplicity in diet and to be far removed from the ways of the rich,
after his father's death, Marcus aureus and his sister,
a corn fi fina were adopted by their paternal grandfather,
Marcus Ave,
thei who had been made trician during the reign of ion.
His father had been a pre and his grandfather served three times as console.
So naturally it was expected for Marcus Aras to follow in their footsteps in
127, a D when he was just six years old,
he was enrolled in the equestrian order by nomination of emperor had himself.
Other than that,
we don't have much information about the early years of the future emperor.
Apart from the names of some of his teachers,
such as DNIS and Alexandra of Koum later,
he was tutored by Alon of Chelsea Dawn,
the man who introduced him to stoicism the philosophy that deeply influenced all
aspects of his life.
The story of Marcus Aurelius has rise to power is a bit convoluted,
but I think we can get there. He was born during the reign of had,
who had no children of his own. Therefore, when the emperor fell ill in 136 ad,
he thought it would be a good idea to appointer. Now he adopted Lucius CS,
commod who was Ember in waiting, took the name, Lucius alias. However,
this turned out to be an ill elevated choice.
As alias died at the start of 138,
a deep next up had adopted Antonius Pariss HISA who became Ember later
that same year after had died on July the 10th as it happens.
Antonios was also Marcus reus as uncle Les.
He married fina his father's sister Adrian's adoption of Antonios came with a
few conditions turn Antonios had to adopt the surviving son of his predecessor a
seven year old boy, also named Lucius CS Commodus as well as his own nephew,
Marcus aureus, all of a sudden a reus was the eldest son of the emperor,
which meant that he was next in line for the throne.
Some historians have speculated that this had been Adrian's intentional along.
Although why the emperor granted so much favor to aureus were not really sure.
Anyway,
Antonios was now the new Roman emperor and to strengthen the bond with his newly
adopted son. He also had Marcus aureus, Mary, his born daughter,
fina the younger, the two of them would go on to have 13 children together.
Unsurprisingly Marcus Aurelius's position, as he apparent, brought with it,
a lot of new promotions. He was first made console in hundred and 40.
He also became the head of the equestrian order, a joins the college of priests.
He took up residents in the Imperial palace and was made stir to learn about the
paperwork and or that we needed to rule Rome. The I office,
he reached while Antonius was still Emper was Pretorian fact at one point,
he also changed his name to Marcus alias or reus VE Caesar,
but we will keep referring to him simply as Marcus, a res for simplicity sake.
Meanwhile, his adopted brother to on the name Luve and followed a similar path,
serving both as quest and consult one notable difference between them was their
physical pro S Marcus sores was frail Embodi as Cassius D put it while
Veis was a vigorous man of young years,
who was proficient in hunting and wrestling,
but took pleasure in all athletic pursuits around our hundred and 60,
80 Antonius fell ill. He died the following year.
Rich's ancestral home in L mending.
What was then the second longest reign of the Roman empire.
After that of Augustus, a few days later,
he was deified at the request of his sons in his book,
Marcus or reus spoke very fondly of his adoptive father saying that no other man
had more influence on him. As a youth. The king is dead long. Live the king.
As the expression goes an was gone and Rome needed a new emperor.
The Senate was ready to confirm Marcus or reus as the new sovereign,
but something curious bar reus refused to take office unless his
younger brother Luci VE was made emperor alongside him. It was unusual,
but the Senate accepted in March the eighth, the hundred and 61 80 March.
The first time that the Roman empire was ruled by two men,
that being said it was never in question who the true leader of Rome was besides
the VAs that mark Marcus aureus was the chosen air.
He was also the older sibling. He had experience helping Anis run the empire.
And he was the only one with the title of PX Maximus there obey Marcus
as a left tenant. AEY a ProCon.
Now you might think that this is a set for some sort of conspiracy or betrayal,
or even an, a assassination down the line.
That's usually how these situations unfolded in ancient times,
but we have here a rare exception despite their different personalities.
The brothers stayed on good terms for the extent of their joint rule and never
did one of them try to use up the other.
You might think that the rule of a calm,
practical and amiable man would mark a time of peace for the Roman empire,
but that would not be in fact for almost his entire 19 year reign Marcus or
really a Swiss involved in one conflict or another first up was the Pathan
empire mighty middle Eastern fact that had been around since the third century
BC. This was not the first time that these two powers clashed.
It seemed that every time the IANS wanted to expand west,
they eventually ran into the dominion of Rome.
This usually took the form of the kingdom of Armenia lands.
That acted as above a,
between the two empires who both wanted to installed an Armenian king who served
their best interests.
The last time this happened was during the rule of tra who we already covered
here on biographics. If you need a quick refresher on him,
why not check out the video that we'll link to below.
Now that happens almost 50 years before Marcus aureus became emperor.
And in the ends,
Armenia became a client state of Rome with its king firmly under Roman control.
It's seems that every few decades,
the new par and king gets the same idea to remove Armenia from under Roman
influence and place it under par influence. In this case,
it was king Volgas as the fourth in a hundred and sixty one eighty,
he marched into Armenia and deposed.
King's Sam mayors replacing him with his own son. PAs,
the Romans were clearly taken by surprise by this move.
And their initial reply was disastrous.
There were two Roman provinces that bordered the kingdom of Armenia Kaia and
Syria,
Marcus SED sever the governor of Kaia decided
to take matters into his own hands,
even though he was not supposed to act without instructions from the Ember app,
allegedly an Oracle convinced him that he would overthrow the Pathan.
So he took Allegion and marched into Armenia.
He reached GUI where his entire army was surrounded and massacre as first
Seran himself. He was either killed him with his soldiers or committed suicide.
Once he realized how badly he had been defeated, seizing the upper hands,
the IANS then invaded Syria and bested the Romans there as well.
The first wave of the war went decidedly in the Perian favor,
and it didn't look like things were going to get better. The Romans,
they were led by two emperors who were completely inexperienced in military
matters. They also had threats to deal with in other frontier, provinces,
such as Britain and Germania superior. Moreover,
the defeat in subsequent retreat of the Roman forces in Syria created perfect
conditions for rebellion.
Eventually Marcus aureus decided that Lucia virus should go in person to
going the war against Paia. If anyone was expecting virus,
be a great inspiring commander. Well,
this was the moment that did away with that notion, as it turns out,
VE was the type of leader who preferred to pursue earthly delights and let
others do the fighting for him. Allegedly,
he spent most of the Pathan campaign to resort in antit Aqua.
He feasted and gambled da surrounded lies underage.
As it is said in the Historia Augusta while legions were being slaughtered while
Syria meditated revolt and the east was being devastated,
virus was hunting and Apulia traveling about through Athens and Corinth
accompanied by orchestras singers. At this time,
we should also point out that the veracity of the or Augusta is highly
uncertain. So don't take anything from it as absolute truth.
His part Cassie's do confirmed that various made his headquarters in antiar
didn't personally take part in any battles,
but made no mention of his party lifestyle, whatever the truth. Fortunately,
for Rome,
there were also a few capable general who left with veers and continued on their
weight to Patha.
Some of the more important ones were Marty Veris staus PR and
Avidi Cassius. Remember that last one, as he is going to be important later,
Marty Veris attacked, Armenia and conquered the capital of Artis sax.
He then restored the heist to the throne. The previous king,
who was subservient to Roman assumes the governorship of Kaha
historian.
Cassius Dio gives most of the credit for the eventual Roman victory to ADIs
Cassius. After king VGAs is retreated back to Paia.
He gave chase and in a hundred and sixty six eighty,
they sat to the cities of Licia and to siphon the latter,
being the Pathan capital afterwards, the videos made his way to Syria,
where he eliminated any threat of a rebellion and was installed as the new
governor of the province later,
Marcus Aras would grant him control over all the Roman territories in Asia,
a decision that he would come to regret.
But one thing you certainly wouldn't regret is signing up for today's
sponsor blinkers. Now, look,
it's not always easy to find the time to sit down and read all the books you
want. I'm a pretty busy dude myself.
So I know that I don't have all the time to read that. I would like,
I used to read a lot more, but like I say,
I'm pretty busy these days and that's why it's good news because I have,
Blinkus basically what it is is you download the app and you can get 15 minute
summaries of some of basically the most important non-fiction books
that exist. And this 3000 of them in here, by the way,
15 minute summaries that are either written or in audio,
I tend to get the audio ones. And what I do is like,
it's about a 15 minute commute for work to work for me.
So I tend to listen to one in the morning as I make my way recently,
I've been going through, uh, this is one I read previously.
That's actually a great recommendation. The snowball, which is Warren buffets.
I think it's an it's, it's a biography, right? Not an auto it's great.
There was also thoughtfulness, which is one I recently enjoyed.
I mentioned this one last time. I think deep work by Cal Newport,
all great stuff. There are actually 12 million people using this app,
which is great. I'm just one in 12 million.
I suppose it's got self-help to business, whatever you're into it's on there.
So look the first hundred people to go to blinkers.com/biographics.
You read a week to try it out. And if you want to stick with it,
which I think you will, you're gonna get 25% off.
If you want the full membership again, a seven day trial that you can
cancel@anytimeatblinkers.com slash biographics, and let's get back to it.
Despite just winning a war, things soon,
went from bad to worse for the Roman em empire,
the soldiers returning home did not come alone.
They brought with them a mysterious illness that started one of the first known
pandemics in history. It became known as the,
an nine plague also known as the plague of Gaylen named after the,
the Greek physician who described the disease and symptoms in his treatise,
Methodist me Endi. It caused fever, vomiting, swollen, throat diarrhea,
thirstiness,
and violent coughing fits that produced a foul loader and skin rashes all over
the body.
The illness lasted for about two weeks and the ones fortunate enough to survive.
It became immune from further infection.
The exact nature of the disease ease is still somewhat of a mystery.
Smallpox and measles were generally regarded as the most likely culprits,
both capable of ravaging,
a population that had no resistance to them whatsoever. In more recent times,
the second candidate has fallen outta favor and both scholars and doctors
believe smallpox was the true cause of the plague.
They points archeological evidence that depict people infected with the on
displaying the postals typically associated with smallpox.
While the Romans picked up the plague while campaigning in Paia,
the exact origins are sh shouted in legend.
There are multiple versions of the story,
but they all seem to suggest that the disease was punishment from the gods
because the Romans allegedly broken oath,
they made to not pillage the city of Licia,
trying to determine the impact of the pandemic with accuracy is impossible.
Some say that it wasn't as bad as everyone thinks,
and it demonstrated the resilience of Rome while others believe it marked the
beginning of the fall of the Western Roman empire at its height.
It killed thousands of people a day as it spread throughout all the Roman
territories, it lasted until 180, 80 D.
And some believed that the plague of Sipri which appeared 70 years later was in
fact, another outbreak of the same illness.
Vastly the Anon plague may have claimed the life of Lucius virus while we don't
have details surrounding his demise virus for LL on 169 ad and died
on January the 23rd, leaving Marcus aureus as the so emperor of Rome,
The an nine plague was just one of the crises that Marcus aureus had to contend
with following the end of the Pathan war.
The other one was barbarian invasions by Germanic peoples along its Northern
borders,
which was also known as the limes Ticus such border conflicts were
relatively common for the Romans and represented an almost constant threat to
their outmost provinces. In fact,
when the enemy was strong and determined enough,
they represented a threat to Rome itself as just a centuries later,
the heart of the empire was sacked multiple times by invading goths and vandals.
The situation was not as di this time arounds,
but the Roman empire was clearly at a disadvantage. It had just finished a war,
meaning that its coffers were getting empty and its people were growing weary of
conflict.
Most of its Northern border was poorly defended because the troops had been
redirected to par AIA and last, but certainly by no means,
least that was the plague to deal with.
It certainly seems like an opportune time to attack,
but scholars are still debating over the exact motive for the invasion.
Some believe that the most obvious answer is true.
The dramatic tribe simply sought to take advantage of the weakened state of the
Roman empire.
Others speculate that in might have been overpopulation or another threat from
the east,
which forced them to expand west the main belligerence beside the Romans of
course, worthy Germanic macro money. Hence the name macro war.
They were joined by another Germanic tribe called the QI and the laser G who
were actually, uh, summation people originating in the steps of Eurasia.
They were assisted by various other.
The tribes as the mathematic wars were a major conflict that lasted for almost
two decades and extended into the reign of Marcus. Orus a successor.
The leader of the opposing forces was BMA king of the macro Manny Cassius S Dio
first mentioned him for acting as mediator,
following some barbarian skirmishes into Roman territory.
This happens in the years shortly before the outbreak of the war and involved
other dramatic tribes,
such as the longer bards and the U on the one side and,
and Marcus Jaus basses,
then governor of the Roman province of ponia inferior on the other,
what exactly persuaded BA Lamar to turn into an aggressor. We don't know,
but in 166 ad,
he United several tribes and crossed the Dan to lead incursions into Roman
territory because of the other problems in the empire Marx or realists was ready
to respond.
The Roman army marched to Pinon and sat up a base at Aquile this time,
both embers were there to lead the troops. According to who the Historia August,
any tribal leaders immediately started retreating or asking for pardons for a
while. It seems like this conflict would fizzle out as soon as it started.
But Marcus sores was concerned that this was all Aloy.
Toal the time he wanted to keep pursuing the enemy.
But this was when Lucius virus fell ill and died. The remaining emperor, uh,
had to return to Rome to make preparations for his brother's funeral. Marcus,
a res returned to the battle later that same year accompanied by his general.
And son-in-law, Claudias pompous a little side note here,
Cassius S D singled out POAs as the military commander who distinguished himself
the most during the macro war alongside another left tenants named per
a,
who would go on to become emperor during one of the most tumultuous periods in
Roman history? Well, that's the story for another day for now.
We see the barbarian tribes gaining the upper hand in the war.
The Leese invaded the provinces of MOIA and Deia and Guild.
The governor Claudias Franzo who served as general during the Paron war.
Other tribes went Reese and destroyed one of the most important religious sites
in the Roman, em empire, the temple of Ellucian mysteries,
but the macro Manny were the most dangerous of all.
They scored a decisive victory at Carto in 170 a D,
where they faced off against an inexperienced Roman army and sled 20,000
soldiers.
They kept pushing until they reached Italy itself of marking the first time in
over 270 years,
that an enemy of Rome managed to penetrate into the heart of the empire.
Marcus really has realized that the macro Manny posed the greatest threat and
considered them a priority when launching a counter offensive legions from other
frontiers were rerouted to fight balmar and well,
this strategy approved its successful by the end of a hundred and seventy one
eighty. They,
the macro Manny out of Roman territory and continued their pursuit across the
Dan new until the macro Manny were defeated.
The other smaller tribes began seeking audiences with Marcus aureus.
Some of them surrendered others offered alliances.
The QI agreed to a peace treaty, but then broke it and went to war again.
Aureus defeated them once more and installed a Roman king called 30th,
but the QDI deposed him and renewed hostilities yet again,
the two signs met in battle and the QDI would've defeated the Romans,
if not for divine intervention, according to Cassius Dio,
at least he says that one of Marcus are really is as re in Egyptian magician
called are NUS prayed to mercury and summoned while the Romans were invigorated
by the pouring rain, the quad struck by lightning and engulfed in flames,
nothing as dramatic happens with the lass though,
they simply surrendered and their king Zant.
Tookus agreed to the terms set out by Marcus or aureus.
The Empress triumphs are recorded on the column of Marcus Aurelia,
still located in the Piazza Colonna in Rome.
It was modeled on the Tramal column of tra who celebrated his victories over the
nations. Also during his years in battle,
Marcus aureus started writing down his personal philosophies,
which forms the basis for one of the most influential works on stoicism.
Even today, his book titled meditations is still a popular seller,
although the emperor never intended it to be published.
So I'll argue that he wrote it for himself, others, that it was for his sons,
going back to the battle. This was only the first Aman war.
It was the biggest of all of them, but it was followed by two more.
It has been speculated that Marcus really is a grander ambitions and might have
wanted to eliminate the threat permanently during the first war and establish
new Roman provinces. However, he had little choice,
but to accept quick victories and peace treaties,
his attention was needed elsewhere. As trouble was brewing in Syria.
Remember avid Cassius, the general from the path war,
he was in charge of Syria in the surrounding provinces while in a hundred and
seventy five eighty,
he decided to rise up against Marcus Aures and declare himself the new emperor
of Rome. While there is controversy surrounding his motives.
He did it because word had reached him that Aures had died during the ATIC war,
even more controversy historian Cass's Dio pointed the finger at Faustina,
the emperor's wife as being the one who engineered this deception, allegedly,
she also believed that her husband would die in the war and feared that an
outsider would kill her son and take the throne by force.
Therefore she preferred Cassius as Emper,
because he would not take such drastic measures. Anyway,
Cassius eventually found out the Marcus aureus was still alive,
but by then it was too late to go back. Well,
actually it might not have been if we're going by Dio. Again,
people trade Marcus aureus as one of the most gracious Roman em, in history,
because he was not only willing to forgive the man who was once one of his
strongest allies, but also said in a speech that if the soldiers,
Senate and people of own had Cassius over him,
he would surrender his power without struggle. Of course,
this may have all simply been a way of rallying the troops to his site.
After all,
what Marcus Aures actually did was end the macro manic war as fast as possible.
And head to Asia with his army. Meanwhile, Cassius was raising his own force,
but a battle between the two,
it never took place just three months after the Elliot started general Caius was
assassinated by his own men who were still loyal to the true Emper.
His head was brought to Marcus, or,
but he allegedly refused to see it and ordered it buried whether or not Faustina
was involved in the plot remains uncertain, but she also died that same year,
regardless of her intentions,
her husband remained devoted to her and a fighters gave her a lavish funeral
with a rebellion over Marcus aureus was finally able to return to Rome where he
had his son Commodus named emperor.
Initially he intended two of his sons to rule the empire as he had done with
Luve. But his other rare NA as Faris died when he was just a boy,
peace was brief as the Ember had to leave in 177 to fight in the second
Maman war, he would never return to Rome again, as he died on March the 17th,
180 at VIN Bonna modern day Vienna, he was 58 years old.
And although he was seemingly a man who chaired wisdom and Emon,
he was forced to spend almost his entire reign plunged into war and chaos.
He was followed by his son commodes. He was the antithesis of his father,
cruel vain, Mercs, DED, inept, and a complete megalomaniac.
Never again would mighty Rome reach the same Heights as Casillo put it.
After the death of Marcus ARA us,
the empire descended from a kingdom of gold to one of iron
and rust. So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up button below. Don't forget to subscribe also.
Please do check it off. Fantastic sponsor. Blinkus who I'm linking to below.
And thank you for watching.
I.